---
layout: post
title: Grad School- The life nomadic
description: "Short stints in different countries make for a richer grad school experience, right?"
tags: [life, living abroad, grad school]
comments: true
image:
  feature: sunset-plane.png
  credit: Rusbase
  creditlink: http://rusbase.com/news/author/benhopkins/ozon-travel-booms/
---

My nomadic grad school adventures have allowed me to experience and learn a lot, and I would encourage anyone to try to do the same. Grad school can be a drag, a long, arduous drag, and breaking it up with short stints in other labs has helped me stay on my toes, build great connections, and keep my mood up. So how do you do it?

#### Step 1: Look for $
Like all things in research, travel requires money, and PIs aren't generally swimming in dough to send you around the world to live in research. My first stint abroad was funded by a [Company of Biologists Travelling Fellowship](http://www.biologists.com/fellowships.html) and my current is with an [NSF/VR GROW Fellowship](http://www.nsf.gov/funding/pgm_summ.jsp?pims_id=504876). Both have been very comfortable, and though I've probably spent more money on other things (hello, 2012 Olympics), I've had no difficulty living abroad on a grad student stipend. I'm sure there are other money sources out there, even within individual universities.

#### Step 2: Find a lab
These aren't necessarily in order, but should rather happen together. For both of my trips, we've floated ideas, I found some money, and then we solidified plans. Spending time in a lab abroad (or just somewhere else) forces you to write proposals and get your project in order. It makes you in charge of what you're doing. I've had less guidance on both of my trips and have functioned autonomously in each lab. My adviser is great for allowing me to do so and trusting me to do so. This may all hinge on having a good advisee-adviser relationship more than anything, which I think is the key to a good grad school experience.

#### Step 3: Go for it (and prepare for unease)
The first time I was a visiting scholar, I spoke the language. It made everything quite easy. This time around, not so much, though English is widely spoken. I spend most of my time, when not in lab, feeling a bit lost, but it has been a great experience. By committing fully to being here (and not spending all of my time talking to people at home), I've come to establish a life and get the most out of this experience (both in and out of the lab). Sure, I've missed some things, like Thanksgiving and my bicycles, but I wouldn't trade this opportunity for anything.

#### The bad
Of course, there are some negatives to such an experience. There's a lull on both ends - stopping experiments before leaving, learning the ropes in a new location, and then wrapping up and picking up again upon completion. The work on my visits has been short, intense, and focused, allowing me to get a good bit done in a short period of time. There are also other annoying things (visas, bureaucracy, trainings, etc.), unforeseen complications (difficulty finding somewhere to live), and there can be trouble taking care of things at home especially if you have pets. These few negatives are outweighed by the positives, so onward friends! Remember, if academia is the course you choose, then the nomadic life is just beginning at these stages.