---
layout: post
title: All my friends are PhDon'ts
description: "Most of my friends have dropped out of grad school. Should I?"
tags: [grad school, friends, PhD, quitting]
comments: true
image:
  feature: phdcomic.gif
  credit: PhD Comics
  link: http://www.phdcomics.com/comics/archive.php?comicid=3



---
Grad school is weird.
<br><br>
That's the easiest way to put it. [Wikipedia](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Educational_attainment_in_the_United_States) tells me that only 1.68% of the US population over age 25 (and I really hope none under the age of 25) have a doctorate degree. That's like the same 1% who control all of the wealth in the country, right? Kidding, really, REALLY. So who are these 1% and how did they get there? I'm going to go through the D's of Ph-ing.
<br><br>
There are countless articles out there written on why you should or shouldn't go to graduate school, what the attrition rates are for each discipline and each institution. I'm trusting you know how to use google; I won't elaborate on those. Instead, we'll take a purely anectdotal journey, because this is a blog and I can do that.  

### The PhDreamer
Ah, applications. Everyone wants to save the world, change the world, feed the world, or cure cancer. No one just wants to get a degree because learning is cool. Most applicants are still going through their final stages of undergraduate work because if you wait to apply for too long, you'll be able to collect social security by the time you secure a permanent position. The PhDreamers are young; cute on a good day, annoying on most days. Green, fresh, optimistic. We were all there once, dreaming of the good we could do once we have our degrees. The Dreamers are promised full funding, good support, and paper upon paper during the interview process. Their dreams don't last long, because they soon become...

### The PhDoer
The first year, for most, isn't terribly different from undergraduate work. The courses are different, the time commitment different, but you don't really own a project yet and are still figuring out the ropes. You're doing it, going along, things aren't too bad, you're making new friends and figuring things out. Sure, you get a bad grade here and there, the lab you really wanted to join doesn't have any funding, and people in your cohort aren't as cool as you thought they were. You're still doing it, though, and those days of being a dreamer aren't far behind. You can do this, or so you think.

### The PhDoubter
Everyone I know exists in this stage for most of graduate school. The feelings come and go, there are highs and lows, you doubt your ability to do science, you doubt your results, you doubt the system's ability to support you. You doubt everything. This can lead to being the PhDepressed for some. Nothing seems to be good enough, nothing works, there's no money, everything is bad. Occasionally, you get a good result and that can lift you out of it, but you still doubt. Doubt is good, as is skepticism, but it can be pervasive and can ruin your ability to get things done. You think you want to quit. We've all thought that, some more than others. The thoughts of quitting grow and grow and take over for some. I want to quit all of the time; I've wanted to quit most things in my life at some point. Every single swim practice and set in each practice? I've wanted to quit those, all of those. Somehow I've powered through, so that's what I have to keep trying to do with my PhD. Wanting to quit makes you normal. Does quitting?

### The PhDon't
As the title reveals, most of my friends fall into this category. When I started graduate school, I made some great friends. They all quit at some point; some with a master's degree, some without. All of my friends who quit were American at US institutions; international students tend not to quit because they can't due to visa and support issues. American freedom, I suppose. People quit at all different times; during the first year, second, or third year students usually leave with a Master's degree (mastering out) and get a job doing something, somewhere. Everyone I know has quit for different reasons, and I won't go through all of those; they're complex and personal, for many. It's safe to say that there's a lot of attrition, some people regret it, others don't. Some are forced out, either due to a lack of funding or a lack of work. We supposedly have a problem with having too many PhDs in the US; what if everyone had stuck around?

### The PhDone
This rare breed, those who complete the degree. There's little to say. I hope to someday join the ranks.

<br><br>
Other PhD-types include the PhDozer (always sleeping), the PhDisappeared (the person who you never see in lab), and the PhDowner who is often like hte PhDoubter but much  more negative.
<br><br><br>

