---
layout: archive2
title: Sitting at the boys' table
excerpt: "A first post on women in science."
tags: [women in science, women, feminism, science, boys]
comments: true
image:
  feature: WIScomic.gif
  credit: Jorge Cham
  link: http://lesswrong.com/lw/fmy/lw_women_crowdsourced_research_on_cognitive/
  teaser: womeninsci.jpg
---


I was recently reading this [article](http://www.nytimes.com/interactive/2014/12/23/us/gender-gaps-stanford-94.html?_r=0) in the New York Times about women from Stanford's class of 1994 and their positions in the tech industry and the dot-com boom that stated right after their college graduation. This was a star studded class, full of tech wizards and including both Rachael Maddow and Summer Sanders. Before I read it, I scrolled through and a single quote stuck out at me: 

>"I've never tried to sit at the boys' table," she said.

When I went back and read the article, I realized that she was saying that she launched a completely different company than what the others were doing, not trying to compete with the boys, but rather fill a different void in the internet space.


We've all heard and seen discussions about the women in science problem and the women in tech atrocity. I don't have anything more to add to the facts, nor do I care to discuss the problem. When I started grad school, I was very into going to women in science events, but after attending a handful, I got nothing new out of them. At each lunch/dinner/happy hour/lecture/panel the only thing discussed was the problem, numbers were given, stories told. We never had any idea of what a solution should look like. Here's how I go about navigating these waters. This may only be applicable to me, but, for me, it works.


### Don't see it as a boys' table
I don't see a table full of boys and think of it as somewhere that I shouldn't sit. Whether this is due to my parent's never making me think that such a divide exists or if I was conditioned at a young age to not see it is unknown. I was one of three girls in my gifted and talented classes throughout elementary school, and at that age where differences between the sexes are less pronounced, I strove to be the best at everything. I could match or better the boys in the classroom and on the playground. I established myself not as a girl but as an equal. I wasn't 'one of the boys' I was just me with a group of friends. There were no divides and there were no barriers; we were just a group of over-acheiving, hyper-competitive adolescents who pushed each other to the limit in everything we were doing. I held onto this throughout the rest of my schooling and never viewed my gender as a limitation to what I could do. I succeeded academically, atheltically, and socially. I sat with the boys, not at a boys table, but at a table where people sat. 

### Mentors matter
When I went to college, I was surrounded by wonderful female mentors who had battled for their positions and had stories of being treated differently on the basis of gender. I didn't have these problems, and am thankful to those who came before me for that. I also had a great family in my swim team. Swimming is one of those rare sports where men and women train side by side, and though we split into different locker rooms at the end of practice, there's no difference in the water. Everyone had good days and bad days, we pushed each other, and it didn't matter if you wore a speedo or a racerback, we were a team. I was sometimes in a lane with all boys and aside from the huge wake they generated, it was no different than swimming with a group of girls (guys, you gossip just as much). I had great mentors who were both scientists and educators and coaches and friends. I didnt' see people compromising their careers or ambitions. I didn't see people belittled because of their gender. I also went to a liberal arts college.

### One step forward, ten steps back
As I've progressed up the ladder of science, I've seen the problems with women in science emerge. I've seen women who are great in the lab listen, but not stand up to, their male superiors. I've seen women shut out of rooms for not speaking up. Whether the sexism is intentional or not, it happens. I do everything I can to not let it happen to me. How?

**1. I sit at the table.** 
Sheryl Sandberg (I don't care what you think about *Lean In*; girl has some valid points) tells the story of women sitting at the table in her [TED talk](http://www.ted.com/talks/sheryl_sandberg_why_we_have_too_few_women_leaders/transcript?language=en). I've come to see that female grad students don't sit at the table, and it wasn't something that ever occured to me. Even in our small group meetings, I notice that the female grad students take the seats along the back, whereas I've always firmly planted myself at the table. I do the same when we have meals with speakers or other discussions. It never occured to me that you *don't* sit at the table.  

**2. I speak up.** 
I realize that this is hard for some people, but when I need to be heard, I use my swim coach voice, speak authoritatively, and know that people hear me. I don't let my thoughts be dismissed. I practice this nearly every week in lab meeting, asking questions until I get answers and making sure that people listen to me. The more I do this, the easier it is. My ideas matter, and I'm not timid about sharing them.  

**3. I'm unapologetic as a boss.**
Boss is a complex word that has both postivie and negative connotations. I prefer to only think of the positive. It's a word my friends and I use to compliment one another. I've come to embrace boss and use it every day. I was once told by a prominent scientists in a room full of other prominent (five successful male professors from all over the world) "You're the boss. You're in charge. Tell us what to do." I did; without hesitation. I put myself in a position where these scientists had to respect me; it had nothing to do with me being a female grad student, and everything to do with me having good science and speaking confidently about it.

<br><br>
Being a female science boss is complex. It isn't for everyone, but don't let being a female prevent you from being a boss. Don't let people speak down to you or put you in a box because your gender isn't what they expect. I tell myself these things all the time, and I will continue to do so.


*Teaser image from [Etsy:Grammatical Art](https://www.etsy.com/se-en/listing/118591395/science-gift-girls-do-it-better-science?ref=market)*