---
layout: post
title: Week in Things, 28 November 2014
description: "A few notes on what I've consumed (and not turkey!) from this last week in November."
tags: [Week in Review]
comments: true
---
Things I've liked this week!

### [Freakonomics: Is America's Education Problem Really Just a Teacher Problem?](http://freakonomics.com/2014/11/27/is-americas-education-problem-really-just-a-teacher-problem-a-new-freakonomics-radio-podcast/)
I have many opinions on this. Teachers, in my mind, make a comfortable income that relates to their education level, job stress, and job comfort. I know people will disagree with that, and the debate rages on. I think the real problem is that no one wants to be middle class any more - we all want to be rich, and we all want to be closer to the richest (who keep getting richer), so it's a constant struggle to make more money for not really doing any more work. Also, as a scientist who doesn't plan on making more than $50k/year before age 35 or 40, hearing complaints about a $45k salary starting at age 23 doesn't make me feel bad. My solution? Lower the ceiling, don't add another floor that can be occupied by people moving up so that the other floors remain empty. It's worth a listen.

### [How craft beer fails it's female fan base](http://firstwefeast.com/drink/how-craft-beer-fails-its-female-fan-base/)
I love me some good craft beer, so this struck close to home. Luckily, I've developed relationships with the people at bottleshops and bars who know which brews to recommend, and never think about it being 'for a girl,' but I have seen this elsewhere. 

### [The Astonishing Rise of Angela Merkel](http://www.newyorker.com/magazine/2014/12/01/quiet-german)
This piece from the New Yorker goes explores the rise and fame of Angela Merkel, an unlikely leader who is nothing like what Germany, or the world, has ever seen before. She's the most powerful woman in the world and is certainly an oddity. 

### [Rethink what you "know" about high-acheiving women](https://hbr.org/2014/12/rethink-what-you-know-about-high-achieving-women)
A Harvard Business Review study concludes (kind of) that husbands, not children, hold back women's careers. Whether or not this is true, or if the sample and self-reported expectations resulted in these conclusions remains a bit unknown. Still, it's interesting to think about how pervasive and disruptive classic gender roles and positions can be in the career paths of women. 




