---
layout: post
title: Being a swimming scientist, Part 2
description: "How being a swimmer made me a scientist ."
tags: [science, grad school, swimming]
comments: true
image:
 feature: clock.png
 credit: Getting Even Faster
 creditlink: http://gettingevenfaster.blogspot.com/2012/09/teaching-age-groupers-to-pace.html
---


*This is part 3 of how swimming and science intersect in my life. See part 1 [here](http://mollyhanlon.com/swim/), and [part 2, on coaching](http://mollyhanlon.com/coaching/).*

My first post on this subject discussed how swimming helped me established a work ethic and attitude of resilience that has helped me greatly when it comes to dealing with let-downs in science. My second post discussed how coaching has improved my teaching and confidence. Here, I'll touch on how being a swimmer has shaped the way I do daily tasks, especially in the lab.

SWIMSWAM, one of my go-to websites for swimming news, posted [this piece about why employers should hire former swimmers](http://swimswam.com/7-reasons-why-hiring-a-swimmer-will-enhance-your-company/) (or swammers). It's been popular in my social media circles because I'm friends with a lot of swimmers, many of whom are looking for jobs. Though I agree with many of their arguments, I have some additional reasons how swimming has improved my science.

## Time and time management

As I discussed previously, juggling practice, class, and work commitments has helped me immensely in figuring out how to balance work and life in grad school. Swimmers have a complicated relationship with time: our lives are ruled by the clock. Though out-touching an opponent is great, if the time on the clock doesn't match expectations, the race is still disappointing. To prevent this, swimmers develop a sense of time that very few other people have. We often did sets where you would have to pace 100s on a time that you name and hold it. I have done this, and still do it now. If I'm doing a set, I know the pace I need to hold to hit my goal times, I can predict the time on each swim before I hit the wall, and I can adjust my efforts appropriately. I can also call out a time before a hard swim and hit it, down to the second, in almost any race. From a young age, swimmers are also doing complicated math calculations with time - bumping intervals, descending speeds, changing reps.  

How does this help me in science? Though I use timers, I know exactly what 1 or 2 minutes or 30 seconds or any other increment of time feels like. I measure it through visualization and swimming a race. This is extra helpful if I forget to set a timer (which happens to everyone). More than this, though, I know how to estimate time. When I'm planning out experiments, I know exactly how long everything will take me, I know how to budget my time, and I hit those times almost perfectly. I don't overextend myself, nor do I end up with a lot of dead time. I'll often tell my lab-mates that something will take me thirty minutes. It does. They're always amazed by this, but they don't have such a devotion to a clock.

## Repetition

A lot of lab-based science requires repetition. Plating seeds, growing plants, and setting up PCRs are all things that are repetitive, mundane, kind of boring, and must be done many, many times. When I tell people that I'm going to swim, they often react by asking how I do that: just going up and down the pool, staring at the bottom, not talking to anyone. Any swimmer knows that it's nothing like that. You're counting strokes, paying attention to water flows around your hand and arm, noticing how your kick timing is propelling you forward, and feeling how your head and body position impact your buoyancy. At the same time, I'm not thinking about anything. It is an exercise in mindless-mindfulness.

Doing repetitive experiments in lab is the same. I have to pay attention, but I have to also be in my groove, going with it. I also find comfort in repetition. A swimming set of 1x anything means that 1x will be hard. 10x is also hard, but if you screw up once, you can redeem yourself 9 other times. One small fault is not a disaster, but something to be learned from and improved upon. 

## Time in my own mind

The other day at practice, a visiting swimmer was showing me his smartwatch that collects metrics on swimming and sends them to his triathlon coach and also allows him to see and read emails why in the pool. Though a self-admitted lover of data, I hated it. My lane-mate, a former college-swimmer turned graduate student himself, agreed. Swimming is the one time of day that we're totally disconnected, only in the moment with ourselves and our fellow swimmers. Though this can happen with running and cycling, there's more of an external environment to deal with, people buzzing around, cars going back and forth, and bugs getting in your eyes. In the pool, it's just you, and a few friends who you can sneak a couple words in with (usually talk about how hungry we are) at the end of a swim. Maybe its the water surrounding us, the muffling of sound that occurs when it rushes by, or the feeling that you're just away from everything that causes this. I don't know, but at no other time am I disconnected like this, stuck to battle with thoughts in my own mind, with no crutch of friends or email or anything else to lean on.

This time allows me to think and explore thoughts on my own, working through ideas, solving problems, and developing solutions. Some of my best ideas have come to me in the pool, and for that reason alone, I'm sticking with it.

