---
layout: post
title: My teaching philosophy, and why it's stuck
description: "Will the institution where I want to teach be around when I can teach there?"
tags: [plant biology]
comments: true
image:
  feature: allegheny.jpg
  credit: Allegheny College
  creditlink: http://sites.allegheny.edu/visitors/
---

Maybe I'm being overly sensitive in saying that the closing of [Sweet Briar College is the beginning of the end](https://www.insidehighered.com/news/2015/03/04/sweet-briar-college-will-shut-down) of the liberal arts colleges, and this is one of my biggest fears. I've said before that I would love to pursue a teaching-heavy career at a liberal arts college, but fear that the increasingly-expensive schools will become unsustainable and unreachable for those who don't come from wealthy backgrounds. This leads me to into an ethical debate over the availability of higher education to the whole population and how it's not *just* an education that should be available, but a high-quality and comprehensive education.

There are innumerable articles and resources out there that discuss the cost of college, it's worth, and the burden of debt on recent graduates. I am extremely grateful that my parents helped me to pay for college. This, I've come to realize, is extreme privilege. I would have never, growing up in poor, rural Pennsylvania, considered myself privileged - I wore hand-me-downs and helped my Mom clip coupons every weekend. My parents, both college-educated health-care employees, were wise in their frugality, saving to help my sister and I fund our education and have some money for their retirement. My grandpa, a former Bethlehem Steel Employee, has always stressed the value of education, and sent all three of his children to college on a meager salary. He also has a bumper sticker on his Ford Ranger that says "There is no dumber man than a poor Republican," so there is wisdom under his blue collar. In emphasising education, my parents let me go to a school that I wanted to, and though I worked both during the school year and in the summer, I never felt stressed financially.

As I've said before, I'm a huge advocate of the liberal arts education system ([yay, liberal arts!](http://www.cic.edu/Research-and-Data/Liberal-Arts/Pages/Infographics.aspx)). I read [this article in The Atlantic](http://www.theatlantic.com/education/archive/2015/03/why-im-a-public-school-teacher-but-a-private-school-parent/386797/) yesterday, in which the author discusses his experience in observing a small, private high school in Southern California and compares it to his experience in teaching at a larger, public school. I was talking about this with one of my friends, who went to public school, started grad school, and now teaches at a private high school. We both agreed that the small school discussed in the article, certainly has a different culture and a different approach to learning; rather than it being for the nerds, it's for everyone. Learning is cool, students are engaged, and they're invested in their own outcomes. Changing the culture of schools is difficult, and I'll be one of the first to admit that I wasn't into learning being cool when I was growing up. I was, however, engaged in my education as an undergraduate, inspired by my peers and wonderful professors. This is in stark contrast to what I see at the larger school where I am now. Sure, there are engaged students, but they're ostracised and not part of the main groups. Can this change? How should we approach education going forward?

I've read pieces in relation to Sweet Briar talking about how college is now about professional training - careers in business, law, medicine, or other applied practices - rather than being about cultivating knowledge and producing worldly citizens. Students can't afford an untargeted education due to the burden of debt and the uncertainty of income upon graduation. I've been thinking about this a lot lately as I've been working to develop my teaching philosophy (something required if I ever want to get that scary j word - a job). I've gone through various iterations of this document, and though I don't ever think it will be complete, I'd like to get my current thoughts together.

## Building a teaching philosophy

The more I think about it, the more I've broken my philosophy down into responsibilities to students, institutions, and society. I also end up mashing a lot of key words together: critically, creatively, comprehension, challenges, but not coming to a clear consensus. I've come to wonder if my inability to come up with a strong stance is partially due to my inability to believe that our current, broken system will continue to persist throughout my career. [Francis Collins's plea to Congress for more NIH funding](http://www.huffingtonpost.com/2015/03/03/francis-colliins-nih-funding_n_6795900.html) is the most recent display of the train wreck that is American scientific funding. And it's not limited to the US. [Canada](http://www.theglobeandmail.com/news/national/funding-changes-usher-in-a-dark-age-for-canadian-science/article22100092/), [France](http://www.slate.com/blogs/future_tense/2014/10/01/scientific_funding_3_000_french_scientists_stage_protest_march.html), and [Austrailia](http://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2015/mar/04/research-facilities-prepare-shutdown-government-refuses-secure-funding) all have issues. So how do I build a teaching philosophy to fit an institution that may not be (or possibly shouldn't be, but that's an ethical argument for another time) around when I have a career? Both small and large institutions are facing a crisis, possibly of different sorts, but both are facing difficult questions and uncertain futures.

My first step is to address some of the universals: why do we have institutions of higher learning? what is their value in our current society and into the future? and how do we best serve a progressing society? Some would argue that college is a waste of time and money. Sometimes I agree, but I think the pre-professional track of college creates narrow-minded individuals who will do little to further society in any way that isn't just economic. I would argue for knowledge over money, but maybe that's why I'm a plant biologist and not in some sort of big-money field. 

Back to those questions. Why universities? I think it's to create responsible, independent thinking citizens. I read [this piece](http://thepointmag.com/2014/criticism/ways-knowing) recently, which is a transcript of remarks given by Robert Pippin about the state of the university. It's interesting, insightful, and depressing. He questions what the institutions are doing and how their current setup differs from their goals. Most poignantly, he says: 

> There is no new intellectual argument that one can cite that is responsible for the diminution in the enterprise of teaching people *what it is to mean and to value.*

So where does that put us, as educators? How do we educate students while working in a system that is, for lack of a better phrase, messed up?

My philosophy leans heavily on teaching students to learn, to analyze and think critically about issues while developing their own well thought-out positions. This is not specific, and can be done in any field, as it requires both strong comprehension and communication skills. I'm a big advocate of the flipped classroom, which I didn't even realize was a trendy thing because it had been part of my education since elementary school. I gravitated toward classes where the lecture system was abandoned for hands-on learning, even when this meant taking physics for physics majors instead of the easier one for biology majors. My grade may have been slightly better in the easy class, but I learned more, was more engaged, and enjoyed the class, despite the difficulty. My high school chemistry classes were 'flipped' and this was a strong determinant in my decision to pursue science. I've received criticism that my philosophy too strongly favors students who are talkative and outgoing, but I argue (kind of) that we've been selecting against these kind of students in science by having lecture-based courses for so long.

Many people think of scientists as quiet loners. Fun fact: we're not, though lots of quiet loners have succeeded in science. If we need to change our systems, maybe we should start with our education model an encourage more outgoing people to join the sciences. I still face a lot of challenges today when I say I want to be a scientist because I'm told that because I'm outgoing and sociable that I should do outreach or something. Guess what? I don't want to. I want to be a scientist.

I hope I have somewhere to science when I finish my training. If not, I hope I can help to rethink our scientific homes into institutions that will thrive into the future, unearthing new discoveries and pushing the limits of human knowledge.

(See, sometimes I can still dream).
